---
title: Conflicting Ideas about the Quality of Time in Memory and for Prognosis
date: 2018-07-02T22:00:00.000Z
---

## Sessions held at the International Medieval Congress Leeds 2018

In Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages, time was not a neutral but a
qualified category. But how and why did special days get an intrinsic quality as
good days, bad days or specific days for specific activities? How was this –
sometimes contradictory – set of ideas transmitted and taught? The papers deal
with beneficial and precarious, prognostic and commemorative calendrical
knowledge about days and times, including a focus on related so-called “pagan”,
"Jewish" and "Christian" ideas about the calendar in memory and for prognosis.

## Papers of the sessions

### Uta Heil: The Sunday between the Memory of Salvation and Divine Punishment

The Early Middle Ages saw a growing interest in Sunday veneration which was
unknown to Christianity in Late Antiquity. Two different and contradictory
strategies of implementation emerged in this respect: the positive memory of
extraordinary events which occurred on Sundays during the salvation history like
the resurrection of Christ (Sunday benedictions), and the negative memory of
"Strafwunder" (miracles of punishment). This paper takes a fresh look at related
texts, especially on Martin of Tours' involvement in these "Strafwunder". It
tries to find an interpretation which can unite these conflicting memories of
Sunday events.

### Immo Warntjes: The early medieval reception of Augustine on 'Wednesday'

Having read Augustine’s commentary on psalm 93, early medieval Christians felt
the need to change the terminology for Wednesday from commemorating a pagan God
(Mercury, Wodan) to a neutral or Christian term. This paper explores the
seventh-century Irish and early eleventh-century German response to the issue.

### Ilaria Bultrighini: Thursday in the later Roman Empire

This paper looks at the role of Thursday – dies Iovis ('Jupiter's Day') in the
Roman seven-day week – during the later Roman Empire and in Late Antiquity. It
discusses a series of sources which suggest that as the use of the planetary
week became increasingly popular, Thursday became the most important and sacred
day in the Roman seven-day week by reason of being the day dedicated to the
chief god of the Roman pantheon and, at the same time, the day associated to the
astrologically favorable planet that had been named after Jupiter.

### Ria Paroubek-Groenewoud: There will be blood... Deciding on the best and worst days to let blood in Carolingian times

Bloodletting was one of several ways of treating an illness in early medieval
times. The art of bloodletting was known for centuries, but for the Carolingians
it was not only important where to bleed a patient, but also when or when not to
do so. Calendrical texts, and guidelines on good and bad days to bleed a patient
start to get copied into early medieval manuscripts from the ninth century
onwards. The question is how did contemporary medical experts interpret these
sometimes contradictory guidelines? This paper will focus on the importance of
days and times for the early medieval 'doctor'.

### Annemarie Veenstra: Be still and wait for better times. Unlucky days in early medieval manuscripts

Lists of Egyptian days, days that were considered to be unlucky, can be found in
large numbers of manuscripts throughout the Middle Ages. These texts started to
be copied in earnest from the 8th century onwards, though such lists at this
point in time had been known for several centuries at least. Even though Saints
Augustine and Ambrose warned against these texts, we find them regularly in
Carolingian manuscripts. How should these Egyptian Days be understood in the
context of early medieval knowledge about time and religion? This paper will
concern itself with Early Medieval attitudes towards these Egyptian Days.

### Carine van Rhijn, Utrecht University: As sure as the sun will rise? Dealing with conflicting ideas about days and times in the Carolingian period

When in the second half of the eighth century, unprecedented enthousiasm for
knowledge gathered steam in Carolingian Europe, its centres of learning and
education found themselves with sometimes contradictory sets of received wisdom.
Texts reflecting on calendrical knowledge are a case in point, for apart from
computus, the Carolingians had a bewildering corpus of material about days and
times. How did students of time approach this mixed bag of inherited and newly
composed material, in particular the parts considered dubious? This paper will
shed light on various approaches to such precarious knowledge on the basis of
manuscripts that transmit this material.
