---
title: About the project
---
## Sunday Observance in Late Antiquity

Research project funded by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF), project P 31428-G32.

Implemented in collaboration with the Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities and Cultural Heritage
(ACDH-CH) of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (Ã–AW).

January 2019 - October 2023.

### General remarks

The four-year project investigates the significance of the Sunday or Lord's Day between about 300
and 630 AD, in particular the period after Constantine's law on Sunday rest (handed down for 321 AD)
until the end of Late Antiquity. As a basis source texts of the Greek and Latin language of this
time are consulted. We are looking for passages that treat Sunday as a day of rest and a holiday:
How is rest from work interpreted? What sanctifies this day? What behavior is appropriate? What
theological arguments are used to emphasize the importance of the day? To what extent does the
seven-day week structure the lives of people, monks, clergy, slaves, business, other social life?
The importance of the Christian Sunday grew as feature of Christianization and sacralization of
Christian society in late antiquity, leading to a uniformization of festive cultures that were
formerly maintained in different social and religious groups, each in its own right. The research
project is part of a widening research interest in phenomena concerning "structuring of time", a
useful complement to preceding searches for "spaciality". The functioning of a society relies
substantially on agreeing on a structuring of common time (e.g., time to work, to celebrate and
sacrifice, to learn/school, to buy and sell, to assemble, to litigate in court, to pay debts or
taxes, to travel) in order to coordinate and synchronize supra-individual activities. Structured
time, as social time, is therefore a temporal ordering pattern that unifies society. The structured
time of a society therefore also creates identity: everyone follows a common rhythm, experiences
sacrificial rituals, processions, games, theater performances, weekly markets, even if not everyone
actually participates in all activities. Of course, the research project cannot pursue all these
questions - we focus on one day, Sunday, and related phenomena.

### Database

Relevant source texts are entered into a database. There we record passages, assign them to a date,
an author, a language, a genre, connect them with further text passages if necessary, mark the
designation of the Sunday, quoted biblical passages and provide them with keywords about groups of
people, activities (from traveling, eating to dying) as well as so-called Sunday Benedictions
(Creation, Resurrection, donation of the Manna; Pentecost etc. - i.e. everything from the biblical
history of salvation that is supposed to have happened on Sunday). The database is presented in the
front-end with the help of three areas, a) with a search mask, b) with points on several timelines,
which e.g. refer to text passages at a certain point in time, and c) with a detailed view, where the
text passage can be viewed in its original language version, in a German or an English translation
as well as with an evaluation and relevant literature. From here you can also search directly and
interactively separated from the search mask.